---
title: Setup (Windows)
description: Full installation setup of Simba, SRL, WaspLib and Scripts
created_at: "2022-03-22 10:18:02+00"
updated_at: "2024-09-26 11:56:02+00"
level: 0
author: ed334a6f-f014-46c2-92f4-6aa86f241540
coauthors:
  - 4dbcf43d-cc8a-48e3-aead-2c55a3f302ee
  - 8571638a-a481-41dd-aa08-b51ca4833084
  - 15728bc5-1ca9-462c-b649-dec3ab36f019
published: true
---

# Introduction

Since the _Legacy Java Client_ is being deprecated and **WILL** go away at some point, so it should no longer be a supported installation method. If reinstalling, please use this guide to install Simba 64-bit and RuneLite 64-bit.

This guide will walk you through how to install Simba 64-bit and RuneLite 64-bit. While it is possible to use Simba 32-bit and RuneLite 32-bit, I will **only** focus on the 64-bit version of both applications. No instructions will be given to use the 32-bit versions.
Just note the following:

- The _Legacy Java Client_ **requires** Simba 32-bit as the _Legacy Java Client_ is a 32-bit client.
- A 32-bit Simba must be paired with a 32-bit OSRS client.
- A 64-bit Simba must be paired with a 64-bit OSRS client.

We will walk through the install process step-by-step starting with Step 1 below.

## (OPTIONAL) Auto-Install of Simba 64-bit and RuneLite 64-bit.

If you would like to use a .bat file that backs up your current Simba and RuneLite install, uninstalls the current Simba and RuneLite versions, and installs the correct versions of Simba and RuneLite - [CLICK HERE](https://github.com/Baconadors/Bacon-Tools/releases/latest/download/Automated_Force_Update_Tool.bat).
**PLEASE** read and follow all instructions in this guide. You may get errors if you don't have existing Simba and/or RuneLite installations. It's fine to just ignore them.

If you used the auto-installing .bat file, skip to Step 6.

Otherwise, continue to Step 1.

## Step 1. Download simba-setup.exe

- Navigate to `waspscripts.com`.
- Click "Setup" in the top bar.
- Click the yellow "setup.exe" button in the middle of your screen.
- Save the file to somewhere you will remember where it is. I chose my desktop.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/82beaf31-9466-4db5-81f0-6abe74459db6" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 2. Download RuneLite 64-bit

- Navigate to `runelite.net`.
- On the orange "Download" button, click the dropdown arrow on the right and choose "Download for Windows (64-bit)".
- The 64-bit RuneLite setup file is called `RuneLiteSetup.exe`. If it is called anything else, **You chose the wrong option**
- Save the file to somewhere you will remember where it is. I chose my desktop.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9dbbb0f1-d701-404f-b006-51aacead8a73" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 3. Install Simba

- **Make sure the Jagex Launcher and any OSRS Clients, if installed, are completely exited.**
- Navigate to where you saved the `simba-setup.exe` you downloaded in Step 1.
- Double click `simba-setup.exe` to start installing Simba.
- This installer installs both Simba 32-bit and Simba 64-bit.
- If necessary, click "More Info" and then "Run Anyway"
- Click "Install" and wait until finished.
- Uncheck "Run Simba" and then click "Finish"
- On your desktop, **DELETE the Simba32 shortcut**.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bff6b234-8323-4430-b1a7-40bcb59d2da5" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 4. Install RuneLite 64-bit

- Navigate to where you saved the `RuneLiteSetup.exe` you downloaded in Step 2.
- Double click `RuneLiteSetup.exe` to start installing RuneLite 64-bit.
- Click "Next" then "Install"
- When install is complete, unchuck the "Open RuneLite" box and then click "Finish"
- **NOTE: If this is the very first time installing RuneLite and you get an error staing "Runetime error: Unable to open file...." -> Open RuneLite manually then close it.**

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/48794247-40e8-4992-a875-c2beb19baac2" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 5. Run Simba 64-bit and log into wasp-launcher

- Open the `Simba64` shortcut on your desktop from the install.
- Click "Yes" on the window that pops up asking if you'd like to associate scripts with this simba.
- Click the green play button :arrow_forward: **TWICE**. Once to load the wasp-launcher script, then one more time to start wasp-launcher.
- When the launcher starts, it _should_ immediately open a browser window to get a refresh token. Click "Authorize" on the Discord page.
- Note: You might be initially brought to a window where you can login with an email and password, or you can click a button for Discord login. If You've set an email and password on your waspscripts.com profile, you can use it here. Tip: This prevents from having to refresh your discord token all the time.
- After clicking "Authorize", you should be logged in to the launcher.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cecc72c8-f15f-4009-b69d-e3e6fd9b2cda" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 6. Install the Waspscripts RuneLite profile

- On the wasp-launcher window, click the "Install RuneLite Profile" button in the bottom right.
- Take note of what your waspscripts profile is named from the dialog box and then click "OK" to continue.
- At this point, the wasp profile should be installed and already active, but we will check just in case.
- Open RuneLite manually. This can be either by the RuneLite executable or Jagex launcher.
- In RuneLite, click the wrench on the on the sidebar to expand it and click the Profiles icons to view your installed profiles.
- The wasp profile for running scripts will be named the first 8 characters of your waspscripts ID as shown in the top left of wasp-launcher.
- Ensure the wasp profile is loaded by ensuring there is an orange line to the left of the profile name showing it is active. If not active, double click it to activate the waspscripts RuneLite profile.
- Completely close the sidebar by clicking the arrow that shows up when you hover to the left of the wrench icon in the sidebar.
- Close RuneLite.
- Close wasp-launcher.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8165db73-b708-4d32-b09c-cc81b9784ad0" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 7. Make sure RuneLite is in Fixed - Classic Layout

- Open RuneLite **manually** and login to the game.
- If you have an email login, you can use your desktop shortcut or wasp-launcher.
- If you have a Jagex account, you must use the Jagex Launcher.
- Click the wrench icon to go into your settings,
- Click the monitor icon to go into your display-specific settings.
- Change "Game client layout:" to `Fixed - Classic layout`.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1ddc76d0-5237-4b82-bc12-e9f8092c65de" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 8. Make sure your in-game settings are correct

- Download and open the Settings Searcher script from Wasp Launcher.
- Use the "Target Selector" icon :dart: to select the client window.
- You click down on the target selector and drag it to the middle of your game window.
- Press the green play button :arrow_forward: to run the script. It will make sure all of your settings are correct.
- After the settings searcher is complete, you should be ready to use any other script!

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0f0e991f-c072-41a5-b247-aa18666af346" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 9. Enter and save your account credentials

In order for your character to log back in from breaks or sleeps, an account must be set up and saved in your simba credentials.

- Open wasp-launcher as shown how to do previously.
- Choose Credentials, click "Install" next to the script revision numbers in the top right of wasp-launcher, then click "Open script" in the bottom right corner.
- Use the "Target Selector" icon :dart: to select the client window.
- It's a good habit to do this every time you start a new script.
- Press the green play button :arrow_forward: to run the script.
- A GUI will pop up and you will follow the directions given in the GUI.
- After account is added/saved, press the "CLICK HERE TO FINISH" button on the bottom of the GUI.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8b5d5892-617b-4f53-b641-c21ca03490ae" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 10. Run your first script

We will run wasp miner at Varrock East. I will give instructions on how to run this particular script. Steps are very similar for any other script.

- Open wasp-launcher as shown how to do previously.
- Choose Wasp Miner, click "Install" next to the script revision numbers in the top right of wasp-launcher, then click "Open script" in the bottom right corner.
- Use the "Target Selector" icon :dart: to select the client window.
- It's a good habit to do this every time you start a new script.
- Press the green play button :arrow_forward: to run the script.
- A GUI will pop up and you will select `Copper` for the rock type and `Power mine (mine and drop)` for the bank location.
- Click "Start" at the bottom of the GUI and the script should now start and power mine copper.

<video controls>
  <source src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/544d5fa0-2b28-4b1f-bef6-edcf77370dfd" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

## Step 11. Have fun

**NOTES:**

- It is extremely important that you always use the RuneLite profile installed by wasp-launcher, **unless** told to use a different profile for a NEON community script. When switching to use any script on wasp-launcher again, always use the RuneLite profile installed by wasp-launcher.
- **DO NOT** open the RuneLite side bar. It will cause graphical glitches and unless you are a developer debugging a script, there is no reason you need to interact with the client while a script is running.
- There are many free scripts to try before you purchase any premium script.
- Some scripts (few) do not have a GUI and you will have to edit the code to change settings.

# Troubleshooting and/or Reinstallation

If you have difficulties installing or things stop working out of nowhere, I recommend using the .bat file that backs up your current Simba and RuneLite install, uninstalls the current Simba and RuneLite versions, and installs the correct versions of Simba and RuneLite - [CLICK HERE](https://github.com/Baconadors/Bacon-Tools/releases/latest/download/Install_Force_Update_Simba_and_RuneLite.w.launcher.bat).

Else, you must uninstall Simba using the uninstall.exe located in `%LOCALAPPDATA%\Simba` and follow the above isntructions again.
