---
title: Simba setup (Debian Linux)
description: Full installation setup of Simba in Linux
created_at: "2022-03-22 10:20:11+00"
updated_at: "2024-08-28 15:21:11+00"
level: 1
author: 4dbcf43d-cc8a-48e3-aead-2c55a3f302ee
coauthors:
  - 00cd42f1-a492-4005-98de-ce1c53fedb01
published: true
---

### Prerequisites

This guide assumes you are using Debian 10+. It might work on other distros, but you might need to do tweaks, in which case you are on your own.

### Warning

Before running any scripts, it is strongly recommended that you inspect the contents of the scripts to ensure they are safe and do not perform any actions that could harm your system.

### Simba Installation

1. **Download the Installation Script:**
   Start by downloading the Simba installation script using `wget`:

```bash
 wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Torwent/wasp-setup/master/linux/simba-setup.sh
```

2. **Make the Script Executable:**

   If the script is not executable, set the appropriate permissions:

```bash
 chmod +x simba-setup.sh
```

3. **Run the Installation Script:**
   Execute the script to install Simba and all its dependencies:

```bash
 ./simba-setup.sh
```

The script will:

- Install required dependencies.
- Set up the necessary directories for Simba.
- Download the Simba binary and related files.
- Set up the necessary permissions using `setcap` for remote input functionality.
- Add a `simba` alias to your `.bashrc`.
- Create a `.desktop` entry for easy access from the desktop environment.

### Simba Uninstallation

1. **Download the Uninstallation Script:**
   Start by downloading the Simba uninstallation script using `wget`:

```bash
 wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Torwent/wasp-setup/master/linux/simba-uninstall.sh
```

2. **Make the Script Executable:**

   If the script is not executable, set the appropriate permissions:

```bash
 chmod +x simba-uninstall.sh
```

3. **Run the Uninstallation Script:**
   Execute the script to remove Simba and all its associated files:

```bash
 ./simba-uninstall.sh
```

## Note

After running the installation or uninstallation scripts, you may need to restart your session or log out and back in for all changes to take effect. This ensures that environment variables and desktop entries are properly reloaded.
