---
title: RuneLite Setup (Debian)
description: Full installation setup of RuneLite in Debian Linux
created_at: "2023-08-28 12:00:00+00"
updated_at: "2023-08-28 12:00:00+00"
level: 1
author: 00cd42f1-a492-4005-98de-ce1c53fedb01
coauthors:
published: true
---

### Overview

This tutorial provides a step-by-step guide to install and uninstall RuneLite on Debian-based Linux distributions. It also includes links to download the necessary scripts.

### RuneLite Installation

1. **Download the Profile Properties File:**
   Download the `myprofile.properties` file:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Torwent/wasp-setup/master/linux/myprofile.properties
   ```
2. **Download the Installation Script:**
   Start by downloading the RuneLite installation script using `wget`:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Torwent/wasp-setup/master/linux/runelite-setup.sh
   ```
3. **Make the Script Executable:**
   If the script is not executable, set the appropriate permissions:
   ```bash
   chmod +x runelite-setup.sh
   ```
4. **Run the Installation Script:**
   Execute the script to install RuneLite:
   ```bash
   ./runelite-setup.sh
   ```
   The script will:
   - Install required dependencies.
   - Download the latest `RuneLite.jar` and place it in `/usr/local/bin`.
   - Set the necessary permissions for the `RuneLite.jar` file.
   - Add a `runelite` alias to `/etc/bash.bashrc` for easy terminal access.
   - Download and set up the RuneLite icon.
   - Create a `.desktop` entry for RuneLite.
   - Copy `myprofile.properties` to the RuneLite profiles directory.

### RuneLite Uninstallation

1. **Download the Uninstallation Script:**
   Start by downloading the RuneLite uninstallation script using `wget`:
   ```bash
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Torwent/wasp-setup/master/linux/runelite-uninstall.sh
   ```
2. **Make the Script Executable:**
   If the script is not executable, set the appropriate permissions:
   ```bash
   chmod +x runelite-uninstall.sh
   ```
3. **Run the Uninstallation Script:**
   Execute the script to remove RuneLite and all associated files:
   ```bash
   ./runelite-uninstall.sh
   ```
   The script will:
   - Remove the `RuneLite.jar` file from `/usr/local/bin`.
   - Remove the `runelite` alias from `/etc/bash.bashrc`.
   - Delete the RuneLite icon from `/usr/local/share`.
   - Remove the RuneLite `.desktop` entry from `/usr/share/applications`.

## Note

Before running any scripts, it is strongly recommended that you inspect the contents of the scripts to ensure they are safe and do not perform any actions that could harm your system. Run the scripts at your own risk.

After running the installation or uninstallation scripts, you may need to restart your session or log out and back in for all changes to take effect. This ensures that environment variables and desktop entries are properly reloaded.
